Chief Objectives and Major Plan Here my major objective is to investigate what and how much il-lumination the Attribute/Self-Ascription View bestows upon our ex-perience in general, and in particular our experiences that explicitly 408 / Hector-Neri Castafieda involve self-reference. Since self-reference is a special case of index-ical reference I expect to learn a good deal about indexical reference. Since for the most part we live our experiences through using a natural language, I hope to improve my understanding of the func-tions of the indexical mechanisms of reference in experience. Since thinking episodes are individuated by their accusatives, I anticipate learning about how in thinking we handle those accusatives. Our plan is to place the tenets of the View in the middle of certain experiences to ascertain the structures of those experiences. This attempt at incisive delving into both experience and the View may sometimes distill some problems for the AttriL ute View. I mean ex-actly that: questions for the View to develop and become more il-luminating. I do not wish to refute any philosophical approach. I believe that air plausible views on a given philosophical topic ought to be developed—really developed to the hilt. Thus, there is no point in attempting to refute other views in order to defend one's favorite view. Deep philosophical illumination is bound to ensue from the comparison of alternative theories, provided they are comprehen-sive and provided they cater to exactly the same rich collection of data. For one thing, dia-philosophical comparision may reveal that theories that look very different are under different terminology the same, or at least mappable into one another. But the theories may be really different. Then we gain philosophical insight by seeing the world, or a domain of phenomena, in different ways. Here Wittgens-teins's reflection on the duck-rabbit design are relevant.5 We should endeavor to see all, the rabbit, the duck, the gazelle, the tiger, and so on embedded in the master design of reality or of our experienceq6 In any case dia-philosophical comparisons can be enlightening. They can help us appreciate better the elucidating power of a theory for a given area of phenomena. We will thus occasionally cast our glance on to other theories. In fact, let us start off with an overall comparison between the Classical Proposition View and the At-tribute/Self-Ascription View. An appreciation of the former should deepen our admiration for the latter. I. THE CLASSICAL PROPOSITION VIEW: AS A FOIL, SOME INDEXICAL PROBLEMS Reference, Self-Ascription and Believing / 409 I. The Main Tenets of the Classical Proposition View The old-fashioned Classical Proposition View described below may be a theoretical reconstruction that perhaps no philosopher ever held in its entirety. But many seem to have written presupposing something like that. At any rate it is an excellent foil against which to see the new Attribute View shine. The view assigns to proposi-tions a manifold of functions. Propositions are at once: (i) Psychological units, as the accusatives of all dispositional states of mind, e.g., believing and intending, and of all acts that manifest or rehearse such dispositions; *(ii) Ontological units, by being the possessors of truth-values in the primary sense of ‘truth’; (iii) Ontologically objective and intersubjective complexes; (iv) Metaphysical units, by having truth-values objectively and tenselessly—'tenselessly’ does not mean: at all times; *(v) Logical units, by being the primary possessors of im-plication relations; (vi) Linguistico-semantic units, by being the complete mean-ings of declarative sentences, and being the core meaning of other types of sentence; (vii) Linquistico-communicational units, by being the full unitary contents of speech acts of stating: statements are stated or statable propositions, and are the units of message suitable for the communication of information. It is not clear whether propositions were by definition all of (i)-(vii), or whether propositions are definitionally *(ii) and *(v), perhaps (i), and the other theses some sort of a priori truths about them. In any case characteristic *(ii) seems to be most commonly accepted as the identifying mark of propositions. The other properties may belong to propositions but not exclusively. This seems to be the unifying pattern of the debates.' The view composed of tenets (i)-(vii) is fascinating for its simplic-ity. All those unit convergencies are powerful tools with which to build a most elegant and unitary account of mental activity, of the connection between language, thinking, and reality, and of the in-formational communication between minds. Historical accuracy aside, that seems to be essentially the view propounded by Gottlob Frege and George Edward Moore , although they both condoned 410 / Hector-Neri Castañeda the violation of tenet (iii) by allowing propositions with private com-ponents. Other philosophers, e.g., Bolzano, also deserve credit for having contributed to its development.'0
Elegance and Synchronic Virtue ol the Classical Proposition View The main virtue and power of the Classical Proposition View lies in the fact that all those units the view equate with each other must somehow converge. If language is to be an efficient means of think-ing, then meaning and thought content must coincide or be closely connected; if language is to be both a means of thinking a means of communication, then thought content and communicated content must at least sometimes coincide, or have a high degree of intimate correspondence; if one's beliefs are to succeed in siezing upon a real world, some of them will have to be true; if it is the same world we cognize as we act upon, then shouldn't belief and desire coincide? Shouldn't the accusatives of intending and will be thinkable content suited to enter the world? Shouldn't there be a pre-established har-mony between belief accusatives and intention accusatives? Frege expressed this intuition (hunch, or Idea of reason in Kant's sense'') by holding that what can be believed is what can be desired, com-manded, required, asked about, and so on. Yet there are problems with the Classical Proposition View. The major problem, to phrase it as a general Kantian Idea of reason, is simply this: The View seems to be successful synchronically, but lacks dynamism. Freeze at a moment, or take an instantaneous philosophical snapshot of, a public candid and efficient communica-tional flow of thinking and speech. Those convergencies seem to jump into sight. There seems to be an identity between the dispositional state of believing and its manifestation in the captured thinking episode; what is thought is there, it seems, in the spoken words, a message ready to be carried to hearers by the movement of those words. The snapshot represents an ideal in which everything is open: thinking occurs out loud, language is steady and reliable, communica-tion is frank and sincere. The discrepancies among the several units involved crop up when the frozen situation is seen as a slice within a diachronic flow, as it occurs within contexts pervaded by different and conflictive purposes, and as something that has to be prepared by undergoing shifting experiences about a steadily changing world. In particular, we must have direct contact with the world both to place ourselves in it and to locate objects that demarcate our place in the world. This is experience. Its backbone is a succession of per- Reference, Sell-Ascription and Believing / 41 l formative references to particulars, performative in that they place such particulars as the (our) contact points with the world. This is precisely the executive-experiential role of indexical reference: reference to items as experienced, or as posited in experience as of this or that type, in some way or another (as is executed through reference expressible by demonstrative pronouns [‘this’, ‘that’], demonstrative adverbs [‘now’, ‘then’, ‘here’, ‘there’]), or as ex-periencers (as they are posited through reference expressed by per-sonal pronouns ‘I’, ‘he-she’, ‘you’). No wonder, then, that the Classical Proposition View comes into trouble when it confronts experience, i.e., indexical reference.
Some indexical Data!2 Consider the particular statements reported by the sentences (1)- (3) below as translations of corresponding French sentences (F1)-(F3) proffered out loud by Armand Duval, on a particular occasion on which he was reflecting on his passion for Marguerite Gautier: (1) I love Marguerite too deeply. (2) Gaston believes that I love Marguerite Gautier too deeply. (3) I know that I love Marguerite Gautier too deeply! Consider also the related statements reported by sentences (4)-(5), which are translations of the appropriate French sentences (F4)-(F5) uttered by Armand's father upon, unobstrusively, overhearing Ar-mand's soliloquy: (4) Armand knows that he (himself) loves Marguerite Gautier too deeply. (5) Armand knows that Armand loves Marguerite Gautier too deeply. For convenience we shall, when need arises, use locutions of the form ‘statement (n)’ to abbreviate ‘statement made by the use of sentence (n) or of a sentence translated as (n) on the speech occasion under consideration’. Obviously the expression ‘he (himself)’ in (4) represents, is proxy for, Armand Duval's uses of the French first-person pronoun ‘je’ in making or remaking statement (l). Patently, statement (l) is somehow involved in statements (2)-(4).
First Problem for the Classical Proposition View 412/ Hector-Neri Castañeda Here he must be disjunctively imprecise to avoid begging serious questions. Roughly, to think that p, whether p, why p, is somehow to produce a representational or symbolic token that is part of a representational system. Obviously, although Armand reflected out loud for our philosophical benefit, he could have reflected without muttering any sounds. Hence, the crucial symbolic system is an in-ternal one consisting of patterns of brain activity, which exercised in appropriate tokenings constitutes or embodies somehow Armand's thinking. Indeed, Armand's utterances correspond really to peaking crests of the internal flow of symbolic events. This is not disagreeable to the Proposition View. The distinction between episodes of sentence production and episodes of thinking is already within the View: that is why it postulates the convergence between sentence meaning and thought content. The Proposition View does not have to identify an episode of thinking that p with an event in the brain, or in the whole body, which consists in some kind of occurrent representation of that p. The mind-body problem is not at stake here. Now, the above description of Armand's reflection is built upon an important distinction, widely nowadays accepted, even though its implications are often not fully appreciated. The required applica-tion of this distinction breaks the elegant array of Unit Coincidences of the Classical Proposition View. This is the distinction between a symbolic system and its application, the distinction so much underscored by Ferdinand de Saussure between tongue (a language system) and parole (speech).13 This recognizes the dynamics of language, and it is itself not inimical to the Proposition View. Never-theless, its application to the case at hand is destructive. The above straightforward description of Armand's meditation necessitates, and casually applies, the distinction between knowing the meaning of sentence (1) above, ‘I love Marguerite too deeply'—not an exact synonym of Armand's (1F), J'aime a Marguerite de trop—and using the sentence to make a statement, to say something true or false. Thus, patently, sentences and words have meanings as parts of a language system, whether a dialect or an idiolect, whereas reference and statements and truth belong to what is actually said or thought. Patently, e.g., most of us know tacitly, i.e., have built-in in our speech dispositions, the language-system meaning of the sentence “1 have one ounce of potassium compounds in my liver’, yet probably no one has ever produced a token of it to make an assertion, and clear-ly we do not know whether it expresses a truth or a falsehood. Reference, Sell-Ascription and Believing / 413 Therefore, sentence meaning and truth-value possession do not coincide at least for the case of sentences containing indicators. lf we continue to call propositions the subjects of truth-values, then tenet (vi) must be shunted. This obvious result deserves some pondering. We may say that meaning in the semantic sense is a lectic matter, whether dialectic or idiolectic, using here the Word ‘lectic’ as the adjective correspon-ding to Saussure's langue (i.e., as a succint translation of his apparte-nant a une langue). On the other hand, on a standard terminology (after Charles Morris), reference and statements are a semantico-pragmatic affair. And here is a consequence not often appreciated: to the extent that the syntactic form of a sentence captures reference and what is said or thought, full logical syntactic form is also a semantico-pragmatic affair. Thus, semantics and semantic syntax are schemas built into our speech habits and dispositions, and compose the enveloping framework within which communication and think-ing occur. The thought contents and the communicated messages are both fillers and further specifications of those schemas. We must not, therefore, go along with the Classical Proposition View and equate the meaning of a sentence containing indexical ex-pressions, like (1), with the doxastic accusative reported by a speaker's utterance of the sentence. What, then, is such an accusative? E.g., what is the doxastic accusative of Armand's thinking episode em-bodied in his uttering (1F)?
The Peculiar Intangibilit y of What ”I” Refers To At first blush an adherent to the Proposition View may respond to the preceding question straightforwardly: The doxastic accusative of Armand's thinking episode embodied in his uttering (IF), J'aime k Marguerite de trop, is simply the proposition we can express in a slightly regimented English as i [Armand Duval at time T of his reflection)] love Marguerite too deeply. Quickly, however, this answer acquires a bad taste. What is the role of our bracketed expression ‘[Armand Duval at time T]’? Why isn't the doxastic accusative in question the proposi-tion Armand Duval ut the time of reflection loves Marguerite too deeply? Why not, indeed? After all, our bracketed expression mere-ly reveals what Armand is somehow aiming at, and isn't his think-ing surely successful because it reaches that target? Yet this does 414 / Hector-Neri Castafieda not seem right: we must account, not only for the role of the bracketed content, but also for the role of the bracketing itself. The bracketing is something vre have done to interpret Armand's ut-terance; the bracketing is not Armand's, and what is bracketed is not part of vrhat Armand thinks when he utters sentence (IF). For one thing, Armand was reflecting but was not aware that he was doing so. In fact, secondly, he was so immersed in his reflection that during it he forgot entirely that he was Armand, that he lived where he lived, that his father was to visit him, indeed he forgot that he had any parents at all. Hence, it may very well be that: (3) I know that I love Marguerite Gautier too deeply and (4) Armand knows that he (himself) loves Marguerite Gautier too deeply are both true, whereas (5) Armand knows that Armand loves Marguerite Gautier too deeply is false. And vice versa. It may be that (3)-(4) are false and (5) true. Having become amnesiac Armand may know a lot of things about the man Armand Duval, e.g., that he was abandoned by Marguerite Gautier, without knowing that they are true of himself. He may pity the poor Armand Duval for having such an indomitable passion for the courtesan Marguerite, yet having no reason to indulge in self-pity because he does not realize that he himself is Armand Duval. In general, a simple reflection reveals that for each third-person way of referring to Armand Duval, say, h such that Armand Duval is (the same as) h—e.g., Gaston Rieux's friend, the Receiver General's son, the man competing with the Count of Giray for Marguerite's affection—we have a statement (5ñ) that can be false while its counter-parts (3ñ)-(4fi) are true, and vice versa too. Each third-person way of identifying Armand may be utterly unknown to Armand. In brief, then, whereas others must use third-person ways to think and gossip about him, not only does Armand not need such third-person ways to think about himself, but he MUST use the first-person way to really think about himself, to think of himself as himself. REMARK I. The two italicized 'himselfs in the preceding Reference, Sell-Ascription and Believing / 415 sentences are, like the ‘he (himself)’ of sentence (4) above, mechanisms especially devised to depict first-person reference. They are special cases of quasi-indicators: mechanisms needed both to capture ephemeral and persGnal indexical references and to depict them both inter-personally and non-ephemerally. From now on, we may write ‘he*’ to indicate the quasi-indexical use of the pronoun ‘he/she (him/herself)’. REMARK II. This semantico-pragmatic contrast between in-dicators (e.g., the inflections of the first-person pronoun) and their corresponding quasi-indicators (e.g., the corresponding inflections of the pronoun ‘he*’) is both a fundamental part of our living language and crucial clue to the solution to the problems of reference and semantics. I take the difference to be a fundamental conceptual universal and expect every language to signal it in some way or another. As words are normally used with their normal meanings, the dox-astic accusative that (1) represents is a most peculiar one. We may still say that this accusative is f [Armand Duval at time T] loves Marguerite too deeply, leaving it open what sort entity it may be. The Proposition View is, it seems, forced to recognize that what is thought by tokening a sentence containing a first-person pronoun, whether in a natural language or in the language of the brain, can-not be some objective feature or entity in the world available to everybody. Thus, first-person reference crashes with tenet (iii) of the Classical Proposition View. Worse, it clashes with the opposition to everything private so well entrenched in the current philosophical mainstream. Given the present passion for intersubjectivity, the mere hint of a need to posit privately accessible egos, or selves, or I's, not to mention sense contents or pains, as the referents of actual uses of singular-referring terms, is a serious predicament. It rings absurd, “crassly implausible to postulate a surd in nature as the referent of a use of the first-person pronoun,” cry out Stephen Boer and William Lycan.'4 Furthermore, the Classical Proposition View cannot, it seems, main-tain that the units of thinking content are identical with the units of communicational content. And once these units diverge, one ques-tion pops up: Are the units of reality, or of measuring reality, true propositions, the same as the communicational units, or are they the same as the units of thought content, the doxastic accusatives, or 416 / Hector-Neri Castañeda must they, too, also go their own separate ways? Let us turn to a novel view that cuts the Gordian Knot of first-person reference right at its root. II. The Attributes/Self-Ascription View
Enter the Attribute/’Self-Ascription View: Its Major Tenets The Attribute/Self-Ascription View is a brilliant piece of radical theorization that clears up the stage. It sharply cuts the Gordian knot of the first-person reference and puts the whole medusa of the Theory of the Self to perish by starvation. The View includes the following tenets, labeled and formulated in my own words: (AT.l) All propositional attitudes have a uniform type of accusative. (AT.2) That accusative is an attribute. (AT.3) The first-prson pronoun refers to nothing: it functions like a free variable representing a thinker as the subject of a psychological state he/she self-ascribes. (AT.4) Sentences containing tokens of the first-person pro-noun are used perlormatively to express self-ascription. (AT.5) The self-ascription consists of a thinker being related in a unique doxastic way to attributes. (AT.6) Persons are doxastically related to propositions via the self-ascription of attributes of the form such that p, where p is a proposition and such that is a universal one-one function mapping propositions into attributes. (AT.7) Propositions are composed of purely objective and in-tersubjective components. (AT.8) English quasi-indexical sentences of the form: (f) X believes that he* is F are preliminarily analyzed either as: (I.al) X believes-himself to be F, or as: (I.a2) X believes-that-he* is F. Again, the asterisk '’ signals quasi-indication. (AT.9) Propositional attitudes are not only the contemplative ones (believing, supposing, etc.) but also the practical at-titudes (intending, wanting, etc.). They are all analyzable in Reference, Self-Ascription and Belie ving / 417 terms of, or include, self-ascriptions. REMARK. My formulation of (AT.8) differs in a major way from what Chisholm has proposed as his anal'ysis of the quasi-indicator ‘he’. He defines the formula (I.a) in terms of his quasi-indexical primitive predicate. This is why I am referring to (I.al) and (f.a2) as preliminary analyses. I am assuming a deepening Chisholmian thesis (AT.8.d) that delves down to Chisholm's final analysis of (f). That deepening provokes interesting questions about his reductionistic pro-gram. The discussion of Intensional Requirement g) in the next Sec-tion is relevant to this. Tenets (AT.l)-(AT.9) constitute the Core Attribute/Self-Ascription View. They seem to be common ground to the two (main) versions of the view known to me: David Lewis's and Roderick M. Chisholm's. Before examining them we need an additional framework of re-quirements for any theory of doxastic content.
Cieneral Comparison Between Attribute and Proposition V1ews: Intensionality Adequacy Requirements The Attribute/Self-Ascription View possesses the great merit we have explained above. But it has other vétues, some of which it shares with the Proposition View. To see this is a rewarding dia-philosophical exercise. One central constraint on any theory of dox-astic accusatives is the family of Intensionalit'y Requirements. These have to do with the intemality of propositional content. Perhaps the most general way of characterizing this requirement is by means of this fundamental principle of the mental: (Int.R*) No type of mental state or act is closed under any form of implication (logical, causal, or whatever) pertaining to its internal accusatives. In general it is NOT the case that: if P implies Q, then if at time T thinker X thinks (believes, supposes, knows, ..., intends, wishes, ...) P, at T X thinks (believes, supposes, knows, ..., wishes, ...) Q. This formulation of (Int. R*) attempts not to beg any question in favor of propositions. (Int.R*) is connected with other requirements. Let us briefly discuss some of them because they will have to be referred to in our ensu-ing meditation. 418 / Hector-Neri Castañeda a) Propositional transparency' and the diaphonousness of con-sciousness. The intensionality of mental states and acts is involved in the nature of a mind capable of self-consciousness, not just able to make self-references to self as such, but also to apprehend im-mediately the contents or internal accusatives of current mental acts for what they are. To be self-conscious that one is thinking P is to know immediately what P is. On the assumption that such accusatives are propositions then self-consciousness involves the transparence of such accusatival propositions. Furthermore, being able to enjoy self-consciousness involves a direct knowledge of the type of con-sciousness one is living and of which one is conscious. Thus, merely to be able to see requires consciousness of what is seen, or presented to sight, but it does not require consciousness of self. But if one can be set/-conscious when one is seeing an object O, one must be able to be aware that the experience one is undergoing is one of seeing. b) Universals and their predicational function. The proper content of thinking—and this should be called here Plato’s Principle—is that the most suitable content for mental acts are universals. They do not have to appear as abstract individuals, but only as predicative content. To illustrate, when one sees something red one sees in one piece the whole of the species of redness one sees: this is the one (uni-) in the versal (diverse): the one in the many. Properties or univer-sals are so unitary and so fully exhausted in their unity that they explain the diaphonousness of consciousness and the transparency of mental content. They also explain how there is a unity of ex-emplification linking the perceived to the unperceived to the unperceptible instances of the same attribute. In these respects the Attribute View is most commendable. Yet it has no definite advan-tage over the Proposition View. As composed of attributes proposi-tions have all the universality of attributes, whatever it or they may be. c) Abstract vs. concrete. Thinking of universals seems less pro-blematic: they provide us with the means of distinguishing individuals from one another. The problem is to explain how we can think of individuals. At this juncture the Proposition View forks into several versions, and so does the Attribute View. In this respect the conservative Abstract Attribute/Self-Ascription View, which rejects concrete or particularized properties (like being Napoleon's fifth son and being in between Cicero and Caesar), and sticks to abstract properties like being a son, being in between other Reference, Self-Ascription and Believing / 419 objects), seems to be more satisfactory than the liberal Concrete & Abstract Attribute/Self-Ascription View. Again here is no definite ad-vantage over a Proposition view that rejects particularized proposi-tions. (See Section 14 below.) d) Finite vs infinite. Apparently we are bound to think, so to speak in person, primarily, or exclusively, of what is finite, and only vicariously of the infinite: infinities covered by one attribute or poten-tial infinities partially constructible by applying a rule that allows positing another item in a sequence. The finitude of the mind under-writes (Int.R*). Here the Attribute and the Proposition Views need not differ. e) Extensions vs intensions. Attributes, sometimes called proper-ties and relations in intension, are the fundamental content of think-ing and are presupposed by thinking of classes of instances or ex-tensions of attributes. Clearly, classes of objects cannot be presented in person to consciousness, unless they are demarcated in some finite way and are unified by a finite attribute. We can see a set of 10 cows as such if the ten cows are within view, and of course the class is unified by the property cowhood, or by some other property, e.g., being taller than the dog in sight. The important consequence of the preceding points is that think-ing of an individual as a member of class presupposes the ability to think of that individual as being so-and-so, say being F, for some pro-perty Fness: I) Predication is at least psychologically more basic than class membership. Thus, an Attribute/Self-Ascription View that takes at-tributes genuinely so, as properties in intension, rather than as pro-perties in extension, as what a thinker self-ascribes conforms to the fundamental Intensionality Requirement of thinking and believing. Again, in this respect there need not be any gain for Attribute views over Proposition views. qj Predicational thinking of a propert y is more bosic than thinking of the propert y as itself subject of predication. This is a most impor-tant requirement that complements I). That is, the primary ability necessary to possess the concept of F is the ability to think thoughts of the form x is F, even if one cannot think yet thoughts of the form Fness is G.
David Lewis's Attributes 'Sell-Ascription View 420 / 16/ Hector-Neri Castañeda David Lewis invented the term ’de se belief’. He starts out with the tenet that propositions have nothing non-intersubjective in them. Hence, the subjectivity of first-person reference becomes problematic. He offers an argument for his Attribute/Self-Ascription View. The argument reveals the other tenets listed above, as well as some special tenets of his own. The argument is, like all philosophical arguments, persuasive to those who accept the premises, whereas those who reject some premise can find assistance in the argument by suppor-ting an attack on that premise by modus toffees. Here is the argu-ment nearly in its entirety: We can imagine a more difficult predicament. Consider the case of two gods. They inhabit a certain possible world, and they know exactly which world it is. THEREFORE they know EVERY PROPOSITION that is true at their world. In-sofar as knowledge is a propositional attitude, they are om-niscient. Still I can imagine them to suffer ignorance: neither one knows which of the two he is. They are not exactly alike. One lives on top of the tallest mountain and throws down manna; the other lives on top of the coldest mountain and throws down thunderbolts. Neither one knows whether he lives on the tallest mountain or on the coldest mountain; nor whether he throws manna or thunderbolts. . But IF it is possible to lack knowledge and not lack any propositional knowledge, then the lacked knowledge must not be propositional. IF the gods came to know which was which, they would know more than they do. But they wouldn't know more propositions. There are NO more to know. Rather, they would self-ascribe more of the properties they possess. One of them, for instance, would correctly self-ascribe the property of living on the tallest mountain. He has this property and his worldmate doesn't, SO self-ascribing this property is not a matter of knowing which is his world. I think these examples SUFFICE TO ESTABLISH my se-cond thesis: SOMETIMES PROPERTY OBJECTS WILL DO BUT PROPOSITIONAL OBJECTS WON'T. SOME BELIEF AND SOME KNOWLEDGE CANNOT BE UNDERSTOOD AS PROPOSITIONAL, BUT CAN BE UNDERSTOOD AS SELF- ASCRIPTION OF PROPERTIES. (Op. cit., pp. 520f; the capital Reference, Self-Ascription and Believing / 421 emphasis is mine.) This argument hinges on the relevant senses attached to the words ’property’ and 'proposition’. Lewis of course explains his intended senses: Not everyone means the same thing by the word “proposi-tion.” I mean a set of possible worlds, a region of logical space . . My target in this paper is the view, until recently my own, that objects of attitudes are propositions in the sense of sets of worlds. I need not quarrel with the view that they are propositions in some other sense. The word “property” also is used in many senses. I mean a set: the set of exactly those possible beings, actual or not, that have the property in question. That means that I shall confine myself to properties that things have or lack simpliciter . I shall speak of properties that SEGMENTS of the road or the person simply have or lack. (Lewis 1979, p. 515; capitals emphasis is mine.) There are many important things in these quotations, but we must limit ourselves to a few pertinent observations. REMARK 1. It seems to me that possible worlds are not suitable for the role of internal accusatives of thinking. They are too large, too infinite to satisfy requirement d) of finitude and requirement a) of transparency. If mathematical set-theoretical truths belong to all worlds, then their magnitude is staggering. See Note 3. I am delighted to see Lewis demote posssible worlds from the role of doxastic ac-cusatives he had bestowed upon them. REMARK 2. Possible worlds do not seem to me to be proper sub- jects of truth-values. Again I want to understand this intensionally: truth-values are intensional properties that propositions (by defini-tion) have. Thus, since Lewis has no quarrel with propositions understood differently from classes of possible worlds, on this score there is nothing to disagree about. REMARK 3. Because of the primacy of predication over set membership we have a concept of proposition that is small enough to be a finite content of thinking episodes. Thus, it seems more pleasurable to think of possible worlds as classes of propositions. Since they are infinitely large, the problem is to identify them in terms of either some individuals or in terms of some propositions. But 422 / Hector-Neri Castañeda perhaps we cannot individuate such classes. (See Grim 1988) REMARK 4. Lewis asserts that his properties are sets. If this is so, then his Attribute View does not satisfy the above intensionality re-quirements b), c), and §. Some of the sets he is interested in may be too large to satisfy the requirement of finitude. Yet sets of in-dividuals are in general more manageable for thinking than are possi-ble worlds. REMARK 5. Except for the demand that propositions have nothing private or subjective, it is not clear why possible worlds cannot in-clude indexical propositions. There seems to be no logical or set-theoretical or semantic reason why models cannot have unique en-tities that play a formal role of representing selves. A possible world can be conceived as a composite of a basic core that contains public, physical individuals, and extensions around that core containing all the I's, other indexical individuals, and all private individuals pro-prietary of an entity in the core. The uniqueness of Lewis's notion of counterparts is more suitable for sub-domains of private objects. Overlapping structure would be a total world, and each extension would be m y world for each person in the world. Thus, Lewis's premise that the two gods are omniscient and they know all the true propositions there are before knowing that they are at this or that place is not evident, even if we equate propositions with sets of possi-ble worlds. It is noteworthy that in his long argument the premise is initially a wholly uncontroversial conditional: see the capitalized “IF's. REMARK 6. Similarly, the claim that perceptual knowledge is non- propositional is not obvious. To the extent that perceptual beliefs involve demonstrative reference, the issue is whether possible worlds can have ephemeral and privately demonstrated particulars. REMARK 7. The idea that i's, no yr’s, this's and leaf's are privately knowable has a point. Yet that they must remain wholly inexpressi-ble by others is not quite right. As observed above it is precisely the function of quasi-indicators to capture other persons' indexical references by means of interpersonal and non-ephemeral quasi-indexical references. To conclude. Our discussion of Lewis's view has dealt exclusively with the extensionalist theses peculiar to his own version of the At-tribute/Self-Ascription View. Therefore, our ensuing examination of Chisholm's version of the Attribute View, which will consider the common core of the approach, is relevant to the study of Lewis's Reference, Sell-Ascription and Believing / 423 view.
Chisholm's Self-Ascr1ption View: filenera1 Assessment Let us continue our reflecting saga on Armand Duval's reflection. Recall his statement: (l) I love Marguerite Gautier too deeply. Recall also Duval Sr.’s statement: (4) Armand knows that he* loves Marguerite Gautier too deeply. According to the Core Attribute View Armand's uttering sentence (l) is simply his act of self-attributing the attribute lov-ing Marguerite Gautier too deepl'y, and the pronoun ‘I’ is not really a referring expression. Likewise, in sentence (4) the quasi-indicator ‘he*’ is not a referring term. But there is an interesting initial asymmetry between (1) and (4). ‘I’ represents a logical gap that makes a sentence (1) a mere predicate. On the Gore View ‘I’ is a dummy grammatical subject that functions as a logical free variable and has a perlormative role; contrasts with the dummy subject ‘it’ in ‘it is raining’ and ‘it is hailing’ pragmatical-ly and semantico-syntactically: in these sentences ‘it’ neither has a similar performative role nor is a free variable. On the other hand, for the Core View in sentence (4) ‘he*’, in spite of its depicting Armand's uses of ‘I’, neither possesses the performative role of ‘I’ nor represents a logical gap, or functions as a free variable. This is captured by the hyphenation in the preliminary analyses recorded in tenet (AT.8) above in Section 2: (4.Al) Armand knows-himself to love Marguerite too deeply; (4.A2) Armand knows-that-he* loves Marguerite too deeply. The hyphenation shows that here is no dummy subject, or singular term, to account for: the word ‘himself’ and the locution ‘that he*’ function merely as syllables of the main verb, or as signals of the relevant serise of ‘knows’, just as indices attached as suffixes to words to disambiguate them—as we have illustrated with the appended ’ as a signal that an expression functions as a quasi-indicator. Normally one tends to explain the senses and roles of expressions in clauses in indirect speech in terms of, and against the background 424 / Hector-Neri Castañeda of, the sentences in direct speech represented by those clauses. The Core View seems to produce an important semantico-pragmatic reversal: the special reflexivity straightforwardly meant by the quasi-indicator ‘he/she*’ is precisely what is brought into existence by acts of first-person reference: the performative uses of the indicator ‘I’ are better understood in terms of the quasi-indexical morpheme ‘he*/she*’. Given that direct speech is basic to, and presupposed by, indirect speech, this reversed asymmetry has engendered a general suspi-cion about the Core View, to wit: Contention. I suspect that the Core Attributes/Self-Ascription View is: (A) more suitable for the semantics-curri-pragmatics of sentences containing quasi-indicators, like (4), than for the semantics of sentences containing the first-person pronoun, like (1); (B) an excellent account of the involvement of the self in non-reflective consciousness, but needs complementation to account for the role of first-person reference in reflective consciousness; (C) in need of development to account for the relations bet-ween oneself and others, as well as between oneself and the world; (D) in need of development to account for the other types of indexical reference, which connect us directly with the world; (E) more illuminating of the semantics and pragmatics of sentences containing quasi-indicators of degree one, like ‘he*’ in sentence (4), than of the semantics and pragmatics of sentences containing quasi-indicators of higher degrees. DEFINITION. An occurrence Q of a quasi-indicator is of degree N if and only Q's immediate antecedent, explicit or implicit, appears in a psychological embedding sentence that subordinates N-1 nested psychological sentences and the (N-l)th embedded clause contains Q. We have seen above that a crucial ontological issue from which the Attribute View sprung forth is the perplexing peculiarities of the thought-of referents of tokens of the first-person pronoun. Among those peculiarities lies the apparent subjectivity or privacy of referents of indexical reference. Yet there is an important issue that underlies Reference, fielf-Ascription and Believing / 425 the question of subjectivity, namely: whether all properties and rela-tions are abstract—e.g., self-identity, triangularity or being a triangle—, or whether some are individualized or concrete—e.g., be-ing identical with Richard M. Nixon, being taller than Ronald Reagan. Each of the different answers to this question seems to be compati-ble with the Core Attribute/Self-Ascription View. Chisholm, for his part, has opted for the following tenet: (C.AT.1) All properties or attributes (including relations) are abstract. There are no individualized relations. Obviously, (C.AT.I) raises a most serious question: If we think at-tributes only, how can we think of individuals? Chisholm's major task is precisely to answer this question. His task is narrowed down, and made more challenging and exciting, by his commitment to a pro-gram of ontological reductionism to stay within the most par-simonious ontological inventory.
Chisolm’s Self-Ascr1ption View: Intensionality Chisholm's view is deliberately intensional. His ontology includes properties, genuine properties in intension, as fundamental entities. Concerning thinking he is adamant on there being two ways of think-ing of objects as having properties, which ways may be said to deter-mine two senses, or uses, of predicates: a comparative and a non-comparative way. Further, he insists that the fundamental concept is the non-comparative one, namely, the one used in thinking that an object is F, given a monadic property Fness, without any reference whatsoever to other objects as F. Here my philosophical prejudices are with Chisholm. To think comparatively that a is red like b, presup-poses the ability to think simpliciter that a is red period, and that b is red period.1' Of course, in neither case are we thinking, or do we need to think, of class membership. Concerning classes Chisholm, always parsimonious, wants to reduce them to properties (pp. 8f). This is, however, another story. The In-tensionality Requirements we have registered above do not include this reduction, nor is it evident that the Attribute/Self-Ascription View is better served by such a reduction. The View arose from the puzzles of self-reference, and its acquiescence of classes as irreducible could very well allow it to deal more adequately with thoughts about sets and class membership. Here we shall ignore this part of Chisholm's 426 / Hector-Neri Castañeda ontology, leaving it open whether class membership is also another primitive aspect of reality or of thought content. In sum, Chisholm's Attribute View seems to satisfy all the Inten-sionality requirements deployed above in Section 2.
Two Tapes or Sell-Ascription: Unreflective Consciousness and Self-consciousness For the powerful reasons we know, the Core Attribute/Self-Ascription View, on the one hand, eliminates the self, and I, as the object to which we attribute properties in a first-person statement, and, on the other hand, makes all thinking episodes, and all states of believing, instances of self-ascription. Thus one's thinking episodes are one's own in two ways. To think of X or that p is to relate oneself to X or that p, but at one level this is trivial, just as one relates oneself to a chair that one kicks or sits on. Here is a serf component all right, but there is no sell-reference. In thinking, besides creating a rela-tion, one affrifiufes to oneself a property, and this oneself is not an I, or ego, but simply the very same massive infinitely-propertied en-tity that others see as making noises or kicking chairs. lt is a nice picture. The View is nicely Fichtean in a moderate sense: all con- sciousness is diffusely self-consciousness, and all reference is tacit self-reference.'6 The View is very adept at handling experiences of the type Sartre called unreflective or egoless consciousness.17 Just ponder this example: Marybel arid the ant colony'. A young woman, Marybel, is watching an ant colony. She is attending to the ants' antics with no self-awareness. Her train of thoughts (whatever her language may be, and we may suppose that she is thinking out loud in English for our philosophical convenience) includes this fragment: (MC) That ant is moving faster than this one; the ant over there! Coming out of the big hive. It is running toward that one; it is stealing the load from it ......... Marybel seems to be doing precisely what Chisholm and Lewis say: she is relatirig to herself everything she is contemplating. And she is doing it through demonstrative references to what is in her visual field. This de facto self-attribution seems to pervade all of our thoughts, Reference, Self-Ascription and Believing / 427 whether perceptual or not. Armand thinks: “Gaston loves no one” and he is thinking of a person somehow cognitively related to him, his Gaston, or one of his Gastons. The Core Self-Ascription View ac-counts for this very well. The View can be used to place human thinking in a scale encom-passing beings that have, besides sensitive consciousness, only perceptual thoughts, lacking altogether the concept of self or of the first-person. We may say that they have only an Externus type of thinking.1 There is also a type of egoless experience that intrudes into oneself, and for this too the subdued self-consciousness of the Self-Ascription View seems correct. To illustrate: Marybel is so involved in her ex-perience that even the parts of her body in view, say arms and legs, appear to her as mere parts of the scene. We may suppose that she is so fully stuck to what she is experiencing that for a short while even her bodily sensations appear to her as being there in the world, as another realm of reality, not as unified as hers. She may think: There on that leg is a little pain expanding down toward that foot, under and along the movement of that ant. The itch of this knee is growing in intensity. Now it is squashed by this finger... ' Children seem to think egolessly about ail sorts of things in their environment before they think first-person statements. But in their second year something extraordinary takes place in their develop-ment, and they are never the same again. They start making first-person utterances in which they attribute to themselves something new. They now seem to be self-attributing I-properties of the form being such that I am F—just as on the Attribute View they had been, and will continue to be, self-ascribing cat- or Motherproperties of the form being such that the cat [Mother] is F. Once we acquire the power of self-reference we are mature thinkers, but maturity here is cumulative. As we all know, sometimes we become so immersed in thought that we forget ourselves. Then something goes wrong: we discover a mistake, a sudden noise tears our ears, a little itching grows, an unexpected thought or image of something hated, or loved, crosses our minds, and then we become aware of ourselves. In general, a little phenomenological reflection reveals this: 428 / Hector-Neri Castañeda (H.C*) Hierarchy o/ consciousness: There are three suffusive tiers of consciousness, each one encompassing and remain-ing present in the following tier: (I) sensitive consciousness; (II) cognitive unreflective consciousness; (III) cognitive reflective consciousness, or self-consciousness. We must distinguish between the unreflective sell-ascription of levels (I) and (II) and the reflective set/-attribution of level (III). This difference in self-attribution is of the utmost importance for human life, even the uncivilized one. It plays a role in building our auto-biographies. Because of this, we leave open at this juncture that tier (III) may itself be composed of several suffused tiers. Urgent Clarification. ii the preceding discussion we are nof mak-ing a linguistic claim to which Chisholm would object, namely, that the use of the first-person pronoun explains self-consciousness or self-reference. The use of the first-person pronoun is evidence for others that self-references are being made. Whatever the connection may be between learning to master some syntax or vocabulary and ac-quiring a concept or a particular thinking ability, the point here is that over and above the basic egoless experiences that children and we all have, there are experiences of another type, namely; they seem to be I-unified. We discuss more profound cases in Secions 11-13, where the above heirarchy (H.C*) reveals that reflective con-sciousness is not one single level but a manifold sub-hierarchy. To sum up, in my opinion the Self-Ascription component of the Core AttributesZSelf-Ascription View is most insightful. Something like the self-ascription this View postulates as primitive seems to be what is going on in cases of unreflective consciousness. Because of the suffused cumulativeness established by (H.C*), unreflective con-sciousness is also present as a base for reflective consciousness; hence, the self-ascription posited by the View seems to be present in all episodes of consciousness. Further, we may accept that what is self-ascribed in those cases is precisely an attribute. At the moment we leave it open whether attributes may be, or have to be, individualiz-ed. The problem here is the higher story of reflective consciousness. We seem to need at least one more type of self-ascription. (See Sec-tion 10 below.) Reference, Self-Ascription and Believing / 429
Seli-Ascription end the Other Types of Mdexical Reference For over twenty years I have been claiming that the several types of indexical reference are mutually irreducible.20 If this claim is sound, the Attribute View has to be extended. First-person or de se reference is only the first step. We should also acknowledge belief de te (you), de nunc (now), de hicZibi (here/there), de hocZillo (this-that). Chisholm rejects my claim. Impelled by his reductionistic pro-clivities, he has proposed to analyze the uses of all indicators in terms of first-person reference. His work on this project is, however, only programmatic. For instance, a bit tm hurriedly he submits that the following “analysis does not presuppose that there is an ‘indexical property’ which constitutes the sense of the expression ‘this thing”’: (C.AT.Th) ‘This thing is F’ is used in English to express the following property of its utterer: believing himself to be such that the thing he is calling attention to is F. (Op. cit, 46,) Consider this actual example: A little while ago, looking at and think-ing of my copy of The First Person: (Th.I) I asserted: “This book is profound and brilliant!” According to (C.AT.Th), then what happened was this: (Th.C l) I expressed my property: believing myself to be such that the book I am calling attention to is profound and brilliant. Calling attention? Whose attention? I am here alone facing my com-puter and my own thoughts struggling with Chisholm's definitions. I uttered (Th.1) to vent my feelings—some of my feelingwabout the book. Even if I had not uttered (Th.1) I would have thought index-ically of that book. It is the thought content that we are anxious to understand. Doubtless, somebody will insert that Chisholm is in (C.AT.Th) furnishing only the analysis of the communicational uses of “This thing is F’. This restriction of the analysis may be fair. But it acknowledges that we do not have a fundamental systematic treat-ment of the thinking uses of ‘This thing is F’. This a serious lacuna in a book devoted to building an account of reference on the inten-tionality (and intensionality) of thinking. Be things as they may, let us examine Chisholm's analysis (C.AT.Th) restricted to the communicational uses of ‘This thing is F’. Suppose, 430 Z Hector-Neri Castafieda then, that my utterance (Th.l) was communicatiorially made to Tomis Kapitan, to whom I communcated my self-ascription: (Th.lr) I am such that the book I am calling attention to is profound an brilliant. This does not seem right. Let us meditate on (Th.I r). First, a most important element of demonstrative reference is miss-ing in (Th.I r), to wit: the performative role of indexical reference. To refer to something as a “this” (a “now,” a “here,” a “you”) is to place the referent in experience in focus in its proper niche. Sentence (Th.1r) is too bland: describing my action as one of calling attention to something does not have the punch of actually calling attention to the thing in question. You might say: “But recall that the uses of ‘I’ have a performative function, and this role is bequeathed to all of Chisholm's analysanda in terms of ‘I'.” This is not enough. The uses of ‘I’ are performative in a very special sense: they serf-attribute or rehearse a self-ascription of a property, and as we shall see in Sec-tion 8 below they possess a holistic character. Now, however, we are confronting a different type of performative function: the plac-ing of the item in experience, or even the calling attention to it. This performative role of ‘this’ present in (Th.1) is missing in (Th.1r). Second, to pursue the preceding point consider a use of the follow-ing ‘This thing is F’ sentence by Professor Moriarty, who in front of a map of London displayed on the wall, is talking to his current gang of criminals: (Th.2) This is what we are going to do: You [patting John on his back with his left hand] bring this gun [giving it to him] and station yourself here [pointing to a spot on the map with the pointer on his right hand]; you, Paul, put this Run [gives it to him] in your briefcase and wait for Art here [another pointing at the map]; you [pointing to Mike] carry this gun [puts it on a table] attached to your leg;’... (NOTE: The italics represent my meta-linguistic emphasis; Dr. Wat-son recorded that Moriarty did not himself underscore any words at all.) By analysis (C.AT.Th) all the uses of the expression ‘This gun’ in (Th.2) will simply convey and self-attribute the property being such that the thing the speaker x IS [new emphasis] calling attention to is a gun. Each use of ‘this’ is a performance of singling out a gun, not, as we shall see, of a self-ascription. Each of these performances Reference, Self-Ascription and Believing / 431 of singling out a gun must be carefully distinguished from one another; self-ascription would at best be a common underwriting performance. Third, a follower of Chisholm might reply that the analysans in (C.AT.Th) has a present tense, the one in the above capitalized ‘IS’, and that it captures the time and executive function of each use of ‘this’. That reply may not satisfy Chisholm, for it introduces an in-eliminable demonstrative noiv reference to the present time through the present tense. Fourth, one important result is this: Each use of the indicator ‘this’ represents an autonomous, individual episode of reference. Never-theless demonstrative references of the this type can be nested. This is illustrated by the very first ‘this’ in (Th.2). Fifth, sentence (Th.2) as a whole falls out of Chisholm's analysis (C.AT.Th). This deals with predicational ‘This is F’ sentences, whereas the first ‘This’ of (Th.2) is a term in a statement of identity: (Th.2) is not of the form this is (the same as) A'. Statements of identity are troublesome, and indexical identites are particularly puzzling. Sixth, now, to self-attribute a property is, as (Th. 1r) illustrates, to take the property internally, predicationally, de dicto. Chisholm's analysis (C.AT.Th) seems to be excessively conceptual. One can do something without knowing that one is doing it. One may call one's hearers’ attention to something without realizing that one is so do-ing. You might rejoin that this distinction does not apply when we are dealing with cognitive activity. But it does. Recall the hierarchy (H.C*) of the suffusive layers of consciousness (Secion 6 above). Perhaps the mental operation of thinking something as a this can-not escape consciousness at all. That is, it must be present to sen-sitive consciousness, and perhaps even to unreflective consciousness. But it often escapes reflective consciousness. Recall that the lower degrees of consciousness are present in their higher degrees. Here we seem to face the converse situation of that for the self: The Self-Ascription View was excellent for unreflective consciousness, whereas now for the case of demonstrative reference the proposed account, by reducing it to self-consciousness, is less apt for the basic phenomenon of unreflective demonstrative reference. Seventh, this takes us back to Marybel and her absorption in con-templation of an ant colony. Recall her indexical statements (MC) in Section 6 above. She referred demonstratively to items in her visual field without having any awareness of herself. Her indexical 432 / Hector-Neri Castañeda references were unreflective. The same obtains for an Externus's ex-periences, and for Marybel's egoless references to her bodily sensa-tions. Here we have the difference between the performative func-tion of first-person reference and that of demonstrative reference sculpted in high relief. Eighth, the concept of calling attention to something is very com-plex. Possessing it presupposes having the ability to make indexical references. Suppose that all demonstrative references were instances of calling attention to what is demonstratively referred to. Then to think that a case of demonstrative reference is a case of calling at-tention to is to classify it. Now, there are very good reasons, per-taining to vicious regresses, for supposing that one must be able to perform basic mental operations without classifying them. This is an operational counterpart of the primacy of unreflective consciousness. This point is of the utmost importance. lt appears everywhere. One intriguing case is this. To believe that p (at least on the Classical Pro-position View) is to take the proposition that p as true. This taking as true is itself a non-judgmental mental operation, it involves no classification of the believed proposition as being true, much less thinking of it as, further, being related to the property truth. Thus, to come to believe that p is to perform a non-classificatory attempt at placing that p on the truth bin; on the other hand, to believe that that-p is true is, among other things, to classify that p as true. Ninth, taking a clue from what Chisholm says about the so-called paradox of analysis, namely, that analysans and analysandum are not identical, someone might suggest that there must be a gap bet-ween (Th.I) and (Th.l r). Since (Th. lr) is the analysans of (Th.I), that someone might continue, they do not have the same self-identical content, hence, all the previous comments establishing such a gap are not inimical to the analysis of ‘This thing is F’ propounded by (C.AT.Th). This is perplexing. Unfortunately, there is no time on this occasion to delve into Chisholm's view of analysis. (See Section 13.) Nevertheless, concerning the meaning and uses of ‘this’, the response misses one point: this gappy view of analysis should help to establish a gap between the information thought of by the speaker in the analysans and the information thought of by him in the analysan-dum. But this gap in information is not the gap in performance we have been discussing. We just need more theory. To round out our examination of the use of ‘This is F’ sentences, we must proceed to studying Chisholm's account of the use of ‘I am Reference, Sell-Ascription and Believing / 433 F’ sentences. We excuse ourselves from examining Chisholm's analyses of the other indexical expressions. Since these analyses are couched in terms of calling attention to something, the above com-ments about his analysis of ‘This thing is F’ apply. Note in particular the two uses of ‘here’ in (Th.2) above. The cumulative result is that each of the different indexical references has its own performative role and its own type of role. This is one of my reasons for holding that they are not inter-definable.
Self-Ascription: Its Holistic Character The kingpin on which Chisholm's analyses of indexical sentences pivots is his analysis of ‘I am F’, to wit: (CA.I) The locution ‘I am F’ has as its primary use in English that of expressing the following property of its utterer: directly attributing the property of being F to itself. (First Permn, p. 42.) It is uncertain how to assess (CA.I). Chisholm declares that the primary use is that in terms of which the other uses are explained. But to make this order of dependencies clear requires a less hurried treatment of the topic. For instance, we have seen in (Th.2) above that for the case of ‘this’ and ‘here’ each used token of the indicator is autonomous. Is ‘I’ the same? What counts as a sentence of the form ‘I am F’ for the distribution of the performative function described in (CA.I)? We know (more or less) what counts syntactically as an English sentence of the form ‘I am F', and we know that such sentences are governed by a closure rule: a combination of an ‘I am F’ sentence with other sentences is also an ‘I am F’ sentence. For the sake of concreteness, consider a statement by a famous philosopher: (I 1) If [a] sometimes I am not tolerant or am disdainful, [b] it is because I am anxious not to waste my fime. Clearly, neither the antecedent [a] as a whole nor the consequent [b] as a whole nor each of the smaller clauses within them contain-ing ‘I’ is used to express or perform the self-ascription of the attributes denoted by them. If there is any tenuous doubt of this in your mind just suppose that (I I) functions as the major premise of that philosopher's deduction by modus tollens of the denial of [a]. 434 / Hector-Neri Castafieda Presumably the whole conditional is the sentence ‘I am F’ to which Chisholm's (CA.I) applies. Thus the whole of (11) expresses seman-tically the property directly self-attributed, namely: being such that if sometimes x is not tolerant orx is disdainful, it is because x is anx-ious not to waste x's time. Thus, the tokens of ‘I’ contrast with the tokens of ‘this’ and ‘here’ in not being autonomous but requiring a unified wholesale interpretation.
Myself end Others: Quantification and Counting As we have seen, the Self-Ascription View is excellent as the center piece of an account of egoless experiences. However, many an ex-perience includes at least an apparent reference to an I as the sub-ject of the experience; besides, some such experiences include references to an I as one among other individuals. Consider, for in-stance, Armand Duval's reasoning: (R) Marguerite eventually makes all those who love her unhappy; I love her inordinately, just as much as the Baron of Varville; Hence, some time she will make the two of us unhappy. And this one; and that old goat, too. Four unhap-py lovers to be! Here we do not care about Armand's logical acumen or the validity of his reasonings. Correctly, or incorrectly, Armand is instantiating a universal proposition into the particulars he calls “I”, and “the baron of Varville,” with no sense of an invidious logical asymmetry bet-ween them. On the Self-Ascription View he is not doing such a thing: there are no I's to serve as values of our universal quantifiers. Furthermore, Armand is counting unhappy lovers: “The Baron of Varville and I make two.” Whereas this, as Chisholm says, is on his view not literally true, Armand does speak with truth (p.44). Armand is ascribing to himself the property of being such as to make himself with the Baron of Varville two. This seems fine. The pronoun ‘I’ may be taken to function as a blank or an unbound variable in the phrase ‘He and I make two’, so that this phrase expresses, in the lambda notation, the property Lx[he andx makes two], being an x such that he and x make two. We can add that the point of using ‘I’ instead of ‘x’ is to perform the self-ascription. This self-ascription is one e/-Sect of counting: He, one; I, two. The role of being counted is, however, submerged. In the counting process the function of ‘I’ is Reference, Sell-Ascription and Believing 7 435 not so much to act as the free variable signaling that we are dealing with a property predicationally, but to seize an item that is supposed to be individuated and differentiated Jrom the other items being counted: it is at best a free variable satisfying at least two semantico-pragmatic conditions: (a) it is a sorted variable that captures the sort of entities being counted, and {b) it is a flagged variable that has a particular value. Condition (b) deserves further comment. It might be adduced that the performative use of ‘I’ includes the assignment of a particular value to the free variable that ‘I’ is. This is not, however, the issue now. The semantico-pragmatic point (b) goes beyond that. Counting is an operation, a performance, not a mere Platonic one-one cor-respondence between the set of instances of a property and a subset of the natural numbers. A performance of self-ascription of a pro-perty is, as have just seen, an operation on the whole property; a performance of counting operates on each counted item. We must distinguish between the piecemeal assignment made at the particular use of ‘I’ in the count; he, one; I, two; two prospective unhappy lovers, from the overall, holistic assignment involved in the self-ascription of the total property in question. Each countirig use of ‘I’ takes an autonomous assignment made to the variable ‘I’ as made there; it is like each autonomous use of ‘this’, discussed above, singling out a counted item, as when Armand counts: “Varville, one; I, two; this, three; that old goat, four; four unhappy lovers to be." J0. The Manifold Semantics ol fiell-consciousness and the Syntactic Undimensiona1ity ol tie Self-Ascription View The problem is still the difference between unreJlective and rehec-tive consciousness. This is a semantico-pragmatic, thought-contentual distinction, and it collides with the uniform syntax of Chisholm's Self-Ascription View. As I see it, regimenting Chisholm's View within a second-order logic, what the View essentially does, very cleverly, is to offer a free variable of quantification as the self-referential mechanism, allowing the variables to range over ordinary physical objects and persons. The View allocates to free variables in sentences about propositional attitudes two roles: to pick out a thinker, and to represent the attribute predicatively self-ascribed: the prefix ‘self’ merely signals the fact that it is the same variable that both occurs at the subject position and is the mark of the predicative role of the 436 / Hector-Neri Castañeda self-ascribed attribute. (Chisholm may perhaps disapprove of this precisiíication.) Consider: (12) Gaston believes that he himself is not in love with Marguerite. Let us suppose that ‘Marguerite' occurs in (12) de dicto, or internally as I prefer to say. Chisholm would analyze away the proper names in (12) in a Russellian-Quinean style. The result in a quantificational frame within which lies a core that can be summarily represented as follows: (12.A) Gaston-x believes himself to be such that: not(x is R-Marguerite just to one y & x is in love with y) There is a question as to whether the negation not is within, or without, the scope of the quantiíier inst one, which the analysis in-troduces. The decision is important. Scope differences matter, and there is a tension. On one side, the Russellian analysis preserves semantic unity if it is fixed systematically with the lowest scope; on another side, the referential use of the terms is better understood as having the largest scope; on the third side, the best choice for the de dïcto content of belief may be maximal scope within a belief context. In any case, as I estimate the elucidatory force of the View, the cross-reference depicted by the sheer repetition of the variable x is the self-reference the theory offers. To me this is an illuminating logical account of unreßective consciousness: the unity of the free variable expresses the unattended unity of consciousness. The ques-tion is whether this is all there is to self-consciousness and self-reference. The semantics of thinking and consciousness, as recorded in (H.C*) above is twofold. Besides unreßective, merely cross-referring self-reference to ‘x', there is reflective, genuine self-reference, which not just refers back to x, but refers back to x quø the thinker x is. My answer is “Yes.” Furthermore, 1 am prepared to find within reflec-tive consciousness several layers of thinking. Consider: Gaskon's Latest Adventure. Gaskon has recently moved into his fully mirrored mansion, with walls covered with different types of mirrors. Two evenings ago some of the most charming and creative philosophers surprised him with a most pleasurable entertainment. They talked about self-identity, self-recognition, and they took full Reference, Self-Ascription and Believing / 437 advantage of the mirrors and arranged and re-arranged them to il-lustrate different types of epistemic situations. Aher seeing everybody out, or so Gaskon thought, he turned around and saw as ‘it in a dream a man who looked like a cross between John Perry and David Kaplan, yet he felt as he were looking at himself; Gaskon even thœight quickly of some movie where a character talks to his inner self both played by James Stewart—or was it Cary Grant? They were staring at each other; then Gaskon heard himself in the méror saying: “You and I are different types of persons; we have different tastes in metaphysics” He recognized his voiœ. The staring continued as pain-ful as the enveloping silence. Then Gaskon blinked, and the truth dawned upon him. In fact, his friends had arranged a recording to sound out at a certain time. Nonetheless, Gaskon is now not sure that he heard the words, or just imagined the utterance. He understood. In Los Angeles one can become high with a spirited metaphysical conversation. As soon as he understood, Gaskon was elated. He mailed a circular letter to the people working on index-ical reference, describing his exôting experience. In my copy I have marked this passage: (13) It was unnerving. There I was ostensibly telling myself that I was different from myself. I realize now that for a mo-ment I believe that I thought that i was not identical with me. Some of his friends were proud of having caused, in their own words, that: (14) Gaskon acknowledges that for a moment he* believed himself* to think that he* was not identical with himself*. Chisholm's view as described above interprets Gaskon's uttering (13) as his expressing his self-ascription of the property being an x such that: (13.A) x realizes (now) that x believed himself to be such that: x believed himself to be such that x was different from Recall that all the occurrences of ‘x are to be interpreted at unison, holistically. For (14) we obtain: (14.A) Gaskon-x acknowledges that x believed himself to be 438 / Hector-Neri Castañeda such that x thought himself to be such that x is not identical with The story suggests that Gaskon was justified in believing i mm dif-ferent from myself, which does not contain the contradictory pro-perty of being not self-identical. Gaskon seems to have been dealing with a contingent sameness x y , where the different variables are to receive different values. How can we inti oduce a variable ‘y’ that picks out a different value than the one that ‘x’ picks out, for such values to be appropriately empirically the same? Recall that the values of the variables are full persons and physical objects, and that self-reference is nothing but back- or cross-reference. It is o1 the utmost importance to appreciate that merely positing selves both as referents of first-person reference and as distinct from bodies or persons does not solve the problem of explaining the semantics of (13) and (14). Apparently we need at least two different selves connected to Gaskon: the self from which he speaks (presumably anchored directly to Gaskon's body) and the self of which he speaks (presumably anchored indirectly to his body through the mediation of his mirror image). Palpably, Gaskon's latest adventure is not very sophisticated. We can expect that at their next surprise party his friends will bring it about that: (15) Gaskon will know that he*(1) believed that he*(2) believed that ....he*(n) believed that he*(i) is different from heb). In (15) n must ultimately be a measure of Gaskon's intellectual abili-ty to figure out a chain of identities. We seem, thus, to need a fine-trained ontological semantics. Frege's with his Sense/Referent distinction may be helpful, especially if it includes Frege's hierarchy of senses. We must reckon, however, with the mis-location of the senses of ‘he(i)’ and ‘he*b)’ that appear in the scope of n+ 1 psychological verbs. Guise Theory has enough resources to distinguish all the individual guises, including I-guises, that may be required to account for the enormous richness of what humans can think. Individual guises are a good deal like Frege's senses, but differ in cricial respects, e.g., in their relations to Fregean referents, in their roles as contents of thinking and speech acts, in their not being part of a hierarchy. The preceding discussion, again, does not réfute the Attribute View. Reference, Sell-Ascription and Believing / 439 It just gathers questions that any development of the View should attend to.
Others' Thoughts About Me: Indicators in Indirect Speech Chisholm's primitive concept isthe propert y of being Fis such that x judges himself to have if, where the substituends of ‘F’ are adjec-tival or predicative expressions. He clarifies what that primitive in-volves by means of some definitions. Two crucial ones are: D2 x believes himself to be F = Df The property of being F is such that x judges himself to have it. NAl: x indirectly attributes to y the property of being F = Df There is a relation R and a property P such that: (a) x judges himself to have P; {b) x bears R only to y; and (c) P is necessarily such that: (i) whoever conceives P coriceives the property of being F, (ii) whatever has P bears R to just one thing and to a thing that is F. (Chisholm, 1986) Consider, Armand's statement: (16) Gaston believes Armand to love Marguerite. Continuing to ignore ‘Marguerite’, (16) presumably is analyzable as: (16.A) There is a relation S such that: Gaston is S just to Ar-mand, and Gaston believes himself to be: S to just one per-son, and such a person loves Marguerite. Assuming ‘Gaston’ analyzed in the Russellian way, (16.A) is a pro-position that predicates of Gaston the property, represented by the predicate obtained from (16) by substituting the free variable x’ for ‘Gaston’. Now, Armand believes (16) and goes on to assert: (l7) Gaston believes that I love Marguerite. Thus, for some relation R by which he is related only to Gaston, and a certain property Gness, Armand believes himself to be G. Presumably (17) is an ‘1 am F’ sentence, and as luck would have it Armand proffered (17), in English. Then what he asserted is that he is one object y such that: (17.A) y bears R just to just one person x (namely Gaston), and there is a relafion S such that: x is S just to y, and x believes 440 / Hector-Neri Castañeda himself to be: S to just one person, and a person who loves Marguerite. This seems to me a very illuminating analysis. To put my praise slight-ly invidiously, aiming at a dia-philosophical exercise: it is very similar to the analysis I offered in “Indicators and Quasi-indicators” (1967). 1 gave up that analysis for reasons that seem to me even more valid today. On the one hand, the analysis makes very high conceptual demands: (a) it takes properties as subjects of predication, instead of merely taking them in their predicative function (recall our discus-sion of predication in Section 3 above); (b) further, it makes use of quantification over properties. On the other hand, these conceptual resources are beyond the ken of many persons who think of others as having beliefs about them. The fundamental achievement of the View here is twofold: it con-forms with the intensionality thesis that the main contents of think-ing are universals and it satisfies the epistemological requirement that singular reference hinge on identification of referents by pro-perties they uniquely exemplify. These requirements MUST certain-ly be complied with by any theory of singular reference. Yet at least for the purpose of dia-philosophical illumination we should attempt to satisfy them while doing justice both to the tact that certain per-sons do not rise up to the level of quantifying over properties, and to the fact that thinking abilities develop, the abâity to quantify over properties being a later acquisition. We need, hence, a theory of thought content and of semantico-pragmatic referents that neither demands nor proscribes that the attributions to others of thoughts about oneself involve properties as subjects of predication—let alone require quantification over properties. This was one major impetus for the development of Guise Theory. l have said that Chisholm's view delivers an analysis of (17) “very similar to the analysis 1 proposed in 1967.” There are two major differences. First, Chisholm's view of self-ascription demarids that every object in the world referred to singularly be singled out by a relation that has explicitly the thinker as one relatum. This is precisely the force of his set/-ascription. That is his subdued Fichteanism. 1 have never required that. Nonetheless, 1 concur that singular reference to ob-jects in the world is essentially to objects in oye’s world. This pro-vokes the question as to how this all-encompassirig involvement of Reference, Self-Ascription and Believing / 441 sell in one's acts of reference is to be conceived. There is no room here to broach this topic, except for some brief hints. On the alter-native view 1 propose, the reference to oneself involved in the iden-tification of objects in one's world is primarfy the implicit self-reference of unreflective consciousness. This has to do, as it might have been expected, with the sudusiveness of the tiers of con-sciousness recorded in hierarchy (H.C*) above in Section 7, and with the greater thermodynamic cost and preciousness of self-consciousness. This hierarchical suflusiveness allows us to account for psychological development and to place human consciousness and mental activity within a larger natural scheme. From Fichte re-mains only the schema of self-reference as this is deployed in ex-perience. Thus, the implicit references to the thinker arenot brought out every time she identifies an object, but are holistically built into the contents of experience. lndexicality and contextuality are, albeit different, closely connected. Doubtless by putting all self-references out into the open, Chisholm's View is simpler than the view I have wrought out, which distinguishes not only tiers of sell-consciousness, but also between indexical references and contextual referential frameworks. This dif-ference in the views is immaterial for my eulogy of the Self-Ascription View in Section 6 above. The fact is that Chisholm's present view, though simpler, does deliver more complex anaiysanfia than the Con-textual View I prefer. Obviously, by simply requéing that everything be made explicit the view creates piecemeal complexity. Second, the other major difference between my 1967 analysis of (17) and Chisholm's consists of our different attitudes concerning Russell's analysis of definite descriptions. Even in 1967 I was not in-terested in analyzing the definite article ‘the’ a la Bertrand Russell. I was happy to regard it as a primitive. My reasons had to do with reference to non-existents, which lie at the heart of thinking and believing, and also because the Russellian reduction worked havoc in deontic contexts. (Later on this defensive attitude paid off in terms of an account of individuation, which grounded the development of Guise Theory.)21 Chisholm on the other hand wants all possible reductions, and his analyses of ‘I am F’ sentences include a built in Russellian analysis of identifying references. This of course leads to additional piecemeal complexity in the resulting analyses. Patently, assertive utterances of ‘I am F’ sentences in which the substituends of ‘F’ contain no clauses in indirect speech need not raise 442 / Hector-Neri Castañeda the problems discussed above. The problems appear when ‘F’, as in the case of sentence (l7), contain a clause in indirect speech. Since subordination of indirect speech is iterative, we should expect a crescendo effect of the above problems for sequential attributions to others of references to oneself. Just reflect on Armand's discovery: (18) My father believes that Gaston knows that 1 suspect that Marguerite does not really love me.
Nested Attributions ol Self-reference: Quasi-indicators o/ Higher Degrees In Section 11 we considered some special cases of attribution of self-reference, mainly Gaskon's self-attribution. Let us dwell a bit longer on the third-person case and its quasi-indexical mechanisms. Recall the definition of degree of quasi-indication in Section 5 above. In Castaneda 1967 it is claimed that tokens of quasi-indicators of higher degree than one are reducible to quasi-indicators of degree one. The proposed analyses involve property quantification. Chisholm can adopt them as basis for his deeper analyses. Chisholm for his part (on p. 120) treats a somewhat complex schematic example adopted from Castañeda 1967, namely: (19) I believes, with respect to K, that he, K, once thought that he, I, was F. Here ‘he, I’ can be ambiguous. Presumably it is intended as a quasi-indicator of degree two; but ‘he, K’ is not a quasi-indicator. In Castañeda 1966 ‘he, K’ was pedestrianly call an (F)-’he’, because it ñlustrates the use of ‘he’ listed as (F). The difference is clear: ‘he, K’ is a mere variable having the preceding ‘K’ as antecedent, and does not tell us how I or K refers to K—being thus propositionally opaque.22 On the other hand, ‘he, I’ is pro-positionally transparent, although it has a de re force, in that it clearly represents first-person references by J. Thus, (19) can be rephrased as: (19*) I believes of K that he(K) once thought that he*(2) was F. Chisholm analyzes (19) this way: Reference, Sell-Ascription and Believing / 443 (19.A) There are relatioris Rl and R2 and properties H and G such that: (i) I directly attributes H to I; (ii) H is necessarily such that for every z, z has H, iff z bears R1 to just one thing and to a thing which, when it has G, bore R2 to z and only to z, and (iii) G is necessarily such that for every y, y has G iff y bears R2 to just one thing and to a thing that has F. (Op. cit., p. 120; on the first line 1 have replaced ‘F’ with ‘H’, since ‘F’ is not bound by any quantifier.) This analysans was wholly unexpected. Given that sentence (19) contains two verbs of propositional attitude, 1 expected its analysans (19.A) to mention explicitly two states of self-ascription, one belong-ing to I and the other to K. Given the non-reversible sequential order of the nesting of indirect-speech clauses, 1 expected this order not to yield the symmetric biconditionals of clauses (ii) and (ii). Further, there is a question about the interpretation of the linkage of ‘when’ to the rest of clause (iii): is it liriked conjucfively, or conditionally? The conditional interpretation seems to be too weak. Yet the con-juctive interpretation does not look strong enough to make up for the aforementioned unexpected features of (19.A). l wonder whether the following properties H and G and relations R1 and R2 constitute a counterexample cleaving (19.A) from (19)? H: having just one immediate neighbor on the South who has just one immediate neighbor on the North when he had just one immediate neighbor on the North, and this was F. Rl: having an immediate neighbor on the South; R2: having an immediate neighbor on the North; G: having just one immediate neighbor on the North, who is Perhaps the contrast between (19.A) and the analysis of it in Castaneda 1967 may help firm up the previous remarks: (19*.A) There is a property Fness such that: K = the h, and I believes that there is a property gness such that: the g = he*(1) and the h once thought that the g was F. In (19*.A) we see the allegedly irreducible quasi-indicator of degree one, and also the éreducible ‘the’ of definite descriptions. 444 / Hector-Neri Castañeda